
# Project Contributors

* Carter Zborowski: Cleaned, merged, and completed analysis for  VALD performance and dynamo datasets for all four of the women's sports to answer questions one and two.
* Sydney Stanton: Cleaned, merged, and completed analysis for  VALD forcedecks and incident datasets for all four of the women's sports to answer questions one and two.

## Further Breakdown

* Carter Zborowski: Contributed multiple sources to the literature review. Cleaned the dynamo dataset and calculated missing values within this dataset. Cleaned the performance dataset and separated it into the Nordic dataset and the hip abduction/adduction dataset, as well as adding differences from norm numbers. Merged the forcedeck and performance datasets and created density plots for the distributions of different variables within the four different sports, as well as the distributions overlaid, comparing the four sports. Used t-tests to describe the statistical significance of differences in strength between the four sports. Created datasets that group observations based on relation to lower body injury; within 3 months prior to injury or between injuries.   
* Sydney Stanton: Contributed multiple sources to the background research and literature review. Cleaned incident and VALD forcedecks datasets by shrinking them by removing unnecessary variables and cleaning up datasets. Taking the sum and average of viable variables, and created a function that tried the mode of categorical variables to be able to collapse categorical variables like numerical ones within one player ID. Found ACL, HSI, and lower body injury rates overall. Made density distribution plots for important VALD forcedecks variables as a part of exploratory analysis. Took two approaches using Youden’s index to find thresholds for important variables with graphics, along with looking into strength trends. 

# Project Overview

Background: For the CU women's basketball team, knee injuries account for 17.99%, ankle injuries for 12.70%, foot injuries for 10.05%, and lower leg injuries for 5.82%. For CU women's soccer, knee injuries account for 23.82%,  ankle injuries for 15.78%, lower leg injuries for 15.78%, thigh injuries for 10.52%, and groin/hip injuries for 8.86%. For CU women's volleyball,  knee injuries account for 13.64%,  ankle injuries for 8.18%, lower leg injuries for 5%, thigh injuries for 4.55%, and foot injuries for 3.18%. For CU women's lacrosse, knee injuries account for 20.14%,  foot injuries for 9.35%, ankle injuries for 7.91%, thigh injuries for 7.91%, and groin/hip injuries for 7.19%. Our focus is on finding thresholds and distinguishing trends in strength in relation to injury risk across the CU women's sports teams.

Question 1: What are meaningful thresholds for strength metrics as they relate to lower body injury risk?   
a. For example, one of our strength coaches uses 5 times body weight (kg) in Newtons for hamstring strength as a cutoff for injury risk. Is this supported by our data?   
The estimate (-0.24924) for this threshold is negative and has a small p-value of 0.000672, demonstrating that being above the 5x body weight threshold is statistically significant and associated with a reduction of lower body injury risk odds. Female athletes who are above the threshold for hamstring strength have about a 22% lower odds of a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold.  
Below is a list of strength metrics deemed meaningful and insightful from the VALD performance and forcedecks datasets, as they relate to lower body injury risk and their corresponding thresholds. Female athletes who are above the threshold (1.024) for the bilateral hip abduction-adduction ratio have approximately 45% lower odds of sustaining a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes who are above the threshold (973.1775) for impulsivity have approximately a 46% lower risk of lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes whose hip abduction mean imbalance is above the threshold (1.4) have 1.48 times higher odds of sustaining a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes whose hip adduction mean imbalance is above the threshold (4.5) have 1.39 times higher odds of sustaining a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold.Female athletes who are above the threshold (301.46) for maximum nordic bilateral mean have about a 17% lower odds of a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes who are above the threshold (301.46) for impulse have about a 38% lower odds of a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. The variable maximum Nordic imbalance had no statistical significance at the 0.05 level. Female athletes whose relative concentric bilateral power is above the threshold (10.3) have 1.21 times higher odds of sustaining a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes who are above the threshold (47.7145) for eccentric concentric mean force ratio have about a 54% lower odds of a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes whose maximum jump height is above the threshold (41.379) have 2.66 times higher odds of sustaining a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold.Female athletes who are above the threshold (15784.34) for maximum concentric rate of force development have about a 33% lower odds of a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes who are above the threshold (783.517) for eccentric mean braking force have about a 53% lower odds of a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes who are above the threshold (0.4) for eccentric mean braking force have about a 23% lower odds of a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold.   Female athletes who are above the threshold (25.489) for maximum jump height have about a 22% lower odds of a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes whose mean RSI flight contact time is above the threshold ( 2.441) have 1.19 times higher odds of sustaining a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes who are above the threshold (0.184) for best contact time have about a 40% lower odds of a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes who are above the threshold (30.813) for peak vertical force have about a 38% lower odds of a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. The most prominent threshold is that female athletes who are above the threshold (8357.859) for rate of force development at 200ms have about a 72% lower odds of a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes whose force at 200ms is above the threshold (24.254) have 1.43 times higher odds of sustaining a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes whose DSI is above the threshold (0.59) have 1.78 times higher odds of sustaining a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes whose maximum jump height is above the threshold (19.223) have 4.55 times higher odds of sustaining a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes whose jump height flight time is above the threshold (17.027) have 3.39 times higher odds of sustaining a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes whose landing rate of force development is above the threshold (31061.16) have 2 times higher odds of sustaining a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes whose maximum concentric peak force is above the threshold (1243.319) have 2.49 times higher odds of sustaining a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. Female athletes whose concentric impulse is above the threshold (123.136) have 3.25 times higher odds of sustaining a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold. All chosen variables from the VALD performance and forcedecks are statistically significant relating to lower body injury risk across all women's team sports, except for Nordic maximum imbalance. The thresholds created are binary, indicating either low or high risk, depending on which side of the threshold the strength estimate falls. A negative coefficient estimate of a strength measure being above the threshold decreases the odds of a lower body injury, and therefore, if it is below the threshold, there is a higher odds of a lower body injury.  If the strength metrics coefficient estimate is positive, then it suggests that being above the threshold is associated with an increased odds of lower body injury risk.

Question 2: What trends in strength do we see across the women’s team sports?  
a. Soccer, lacrosse, volleyball, basketball.   
In the original incident dataset, women's basketball had a total of 42 lower body injuries, 1 of which was an ACL injury, and none were HSI injuries. In women's soccer, there is a total of 76 lower body injuries, with 1 of them being ACL injuries, and 2 being HSI injuries. In women's volleyball, 28 lower body injuries occurred, 4 of them being ACL injuries, 1 of them being HSI injuries. In women's lacrosse, 31 lower body injuries occurred, three being ACL-related, 4 being HSI injury-related. In our cut-down dataset, the same trend is seen as volleyball leads in most ACL injuries, lacrosse in most HSI injuries, and soccer in most lower body injuries and overall number of injuries out of all the sports. Across all women's sports, almost all injuries are new and not recurrent. Soccer, followed by basketball, has the most recurring injuries, but new injuries still make up the bulk of all injuries. Across all women's sports, almost all training coming from the DSI bucket is ballistic strength training, which emphasizes speed and explosiveness, except for lacrosse, where their training is split pretty evenly between ballistic and concurrent training. Comparing the sports now, in terms of countermovement jump data for the four sports, we see that basketball, volleyball, and lacrosse all have slightly greater values for modified RSI than the normative data. Soccer, on the other hand, has values lower than the normative data. Comparing the sports together indicates a statistically significant difference in the mean modified RSI of each sport in order of least to greatest as follows: lacrosse, soccer, basketball, and volleyball with means of 0.3669787, 0.3847007, 0.4415473, and 0.4634418, respectively. All sports were slightly below normative data for the jump height in centimeters, but volleyball had percentile numbers that almost matched the normative data. Comparing each sport together in regard to jump height indicates that there is a statistically significant difference between lacrosse and each other sport with lacrosse being the lowest, between volleyball and each sport with volleyball being the highest, and basketball and soccer were not statistically different from each other with soccer having a slightly larger mean. The means for these values were as follows: 27.92221 (lacrosse), 28.86822 (basketball), 28.92412 (soccer), and 32.92271 (volleyball). While there is no specific normative data for DSI it is evident that there are large differences in the distribution for DSI within each sport. There is a statistically significant difference between each sport with the lowest average DSI sport being volleyball, then basketball, then soccer and finally the largest average DSI sport lacrosse. These sports had average DSI values of 0.3142877, 0.4762217, 0.7168750, and 0.8036900, respectively. For the RSI of the hop jump test, all sports with the exception of women's lacrosse outperformed normative data. Basketball outperformed its normative data by a very large amount while soccer stayed relatively close to the normative thresholds. Comparing the sports by mean RSI, the only sport that had a statistically significant difference was lacrosse being the lowest, and the rest were all not statistically significantly apart from each other. These RSI values are as follows: 1.885 (lacrosse), 2.283 (basketball), 2.286 (soccer), and 2.297 (volleyball). The mean contact time for the three sports with normative data, on the other hand, lines up relatively well with the percentiles of their normative data. Only lacrosse had a 50th percentile greater than the 50th percentile of its normative data and the difference is not very large. The difference between the average mean contact time for soccer, basketball, and lacrosse is significant, as well as, soccer, volleyball, and lacrosse with soccer being the lowest and lacrosse being the greatest. The difference between the average mean contact time for basketball and volleyball, however, is not statistically significant. The average contact times for these sports in seconds is as follows: 0.2051763 (soccer), 0.2167946 (basketball), 0.2186960 (volleyball), and 0.2602862 (lacrosse). In terms of nordic strength data, all CU sports have greater average maximum bilateral force than the normative data with the differences from the normative data for the court sports being greater than the differences for the field sports. Comparing the sports there is a statistically significant difference for the average mean bilateral force between all of the sports with lacrosse being the lowest, soccer next, then volleyball and finally basketball with the greatest average mean bilateral force (the difference between basketball and volleyball is only significant to 0.1 level). The average mean bilateral force values for each sport are as follows: 287.9800 (lacrosse), 302.7908 (soccer), 324.8174 (volleyball), and 334.0163 (basketball). However, in terms of mean bilateral force relative to body weight, basketball has the lowest, followed by soccer, and volleyball and lacrosse are the greatest. For the hip abduction/adduction numbers CU athletes in these four sports appear to be above the normative data for both abduction and adduction with the exception of women’s soccer for abduction force, which is just slightly under the normative percentiles. The difference between the average maximum adduction force for lacrosse and all three other sports is statistically significant, with lacrosse being the lowest and all three other sports not having a statistically significant difference between each other. The average maximum adduction forces for each sport are as follows: 267.1303 (lacrosse), 347.3856 (basketball), 347.7381 (volleyball), and 348.3397 (soccer). Abduction on the other hand is more broken up by court vs field sports with lacrosse having the lowest average maximum abduction force, followed by soccer, then volleyball and basketball. The difference between all sports are statistically significant but the difference between soccer and lacrosse is only significant to the 0.1 level. These average maximum abduction force numbers are as follows: 274.2115 (lacrosse), 301.2115 (soccer), 342.7099 (volleyball), and 360.3042 (basketball).

# Code Implementation

Overall, this notebook is designed to be run sequentially. If you start from the top down, execution should be straightforward, and the code should run as expected. Our dependencies include the tidyverse package for general dataset cleaning and graph creation, the cutpointr and pROC packages for threshold optimization, and the grid, png, cowplot, and magick packages for importing normative data images.    
1. Data Cleaning   
We worked through sixteen different datasets for our analytical work. As we had multiple large datasets with lots of information duplicated or not important to our analysis, we took a lot of time looking through all the data, and with our background research knowledge, we were able to remove some variables completely or combine information together to diminish our data frame size. We investigated all datasets, as a big part of this project is variable importance, thus making sure to continue on with only and all meaningful data. While choosing what variables to use, we also noted that many variables were averaged and summed to what was deemed appropriate, along with a mode function being created to average (most frequent) the categorical variables. We were able to reconnect with some of our background research, where we learned about indicators related to specific lower body injuries and what tests in the  VALD forcedecks datasets they relate to. There was only data for the most part from the last two years, so we decided in our general dataset not to filter down to a shorter timeframe, so we still would have a good amount of datapoints to compare. In the incident datasets, binaries were made, such as lower body injuries, determined by (Thigh, Ankle, Lower leg, Knee, Foot, Groin/hip).  ACL by (KL1, KLA), and HSI by  (TM1, TMB, TMS). ACL and HSI came from the  OSICS14.Code column, while the lower body injury was deemed by the body part column. We also had to rename some sections in columns, such as position, where a few athletes had a list of positions, where we just found it was better to focus on their primary position, along with their primary sport. The foredeck datasets were sorted into smaller datasets of the three to four most important tests done for each sport. For basketball, it was the countermovement jump, hop jump, isometric mid-thigh pull, and the drop jump test. For soccer, it was the countermovement jump, hop jump, single leg jump, and the isometric mid-thigh pull test. For lacrosse, the countermovement jump, hop jump, single leg jump, and the isometric mid-thigh pull test. For volleyball, the countermovement jump, isometric mid-thigh pull, and the hop jump test. For the dynamo dataset, only the summary statistics for lower body tests were selected, and some missing asymmetry metrics were calculated. For the soccer dynamo dataset, the metrics were not aligned, so the anon_id needed to be grouped and the metrics summarized, as well as each asymmetry metric being calculated. These datasets did not contain very many observations and very few unique players, so not many associations could be drawn from these datasets. For the performance datasets, all variables for Nordic and hip data are selected and then separated into individual Nordic and hip datasets for each sport. From here, some strange values are omitted, such as body weights below 5 kg, and some normative information is summarized. We merged all relevant data together on the anon_id variable, which is unique for every player. We have a separate document including all variables on it, labeled as dataset information.  
2. Exploratory Analysis   
Created density plots of different metrics for each sport. Contact injuries seem to be the biggest concern for women's basketball, as the focus on lower-body injuries is typically non-contact. In-season is the biggest time for injuries in basketball. The highest frequency of lower body injuries for soccer is in-season, but an unexpectedly high rate of lower body injuries occurs in the off-season as well. Contact injuries are 2x as likely as a non-contact injury in women's soccer. In volleyball and lacrosse, we see the highest lower body injury frequency with non-contact as the injury mechanism. Boxplots and histograms are used to visualize the distributions of different variables within the dynamo, forcedecks, and performance datasets. However, the dynamo datasets are very small with very few unique players, so the visualizations could be misleading. These visualizations are created for many different variables within each sport to begin analyzing trends between the sports. From this introduction exploration of the data, there do appear to be differences in strength between the sports in general. The number of unique positions is also summarized within the performance dataset to determine whether the player's position can be analyzed. Some correlation matrices are also created to gain a better understanding of the variables within the performance Nordic dataset.   
3. Meaningful Thresholds for Strength Metrics Relating to Lower Body Injury Risk  
a. One of our strength coaches uses 5 times body weight (kg) in Newtons for hamstring strength as a cutoff for injury risk. Is this supported by our data?   
All of the Nordic performance data from across the four sports and all of the incident data from across the four sports were merged together. Then, a strength ratio was created to account for hamstring strength being five times the bodyweight of the athlete, and with that strength ratio, a threshold was created to make a model with it. A generalized linear model was made to test if being above the threshold would relate to lower body injury risk. The model showed a statistically significant p-value with a coefficient estimate demonstrating the relation of hamstring strength to lower body injury risk. As hamstring strength is above the threshold, the lower body injury risk is decreased. Then across the sports, the same test types were combined together and with the incident dataset. Then began to find our own thresholds for other valuable variables. I used two different methods to determine the optimal threshold for each variable and chose the best from the two. I first used the package cutpointr that tries to find the optimal threshold for a continuous variable to then classify binary outcomes. It finds the threshold of the variable that maximizes Youden’s index, which balances sensitivity and specificity. Then gives plots of the ROC, cutpoint, and outputs the summary showing the optimal cutpoint, AUC, sensitivity, and specificity. The second method utilized the pROC package. It builds a ROC curve that has the response as a binary injury outcome, plots the ROC curve, and prints the AUC. Extracting the best threshold using Youden’s index, giving the threshold, sensitivity, and specificity. Then, plotting the ROC curve again with the optimal threshold point highlighted. Then, applying the better threshold, we test the association of the variable with lower body injury risk. Adding a new binary column of 1 if the variable is above the threshold, 0 otherwise. We then fit a logistic regression model to investigate whether being above the threshold is associated with a decrease in injury risk. Lastly, computed the odds ratio from the estimated coefficient. Calculating the percent decrease in odds. So, a variable being above the threshold is associated with ~#% lower odds of lower body injury. This is repeated for all important variables relating to lower-body injury risk.  
4. Trends in Strength in Women's Sports   
First, we simply counted the number of each injury type to get a baseline of the kinds of injuries by each woman's sport, along with the number of observations using each test type to help determine which tests to draw insights from for each sport. Then we made a categorical variable with only the three most prominent injury types: ACL, HSI, and general lower body injury. Then, for the forcedecks data, a new variable called Thresh is added to the dataframe as a binary. 'Yes' being if the variable >= 0.5 and 'No' otherwise. Then creating a contingency table of lower body Injury status with whether the athlete is above or below the threshold. To observe if there's any relationship between injury status and being above/below the power threshold. Plots a boxplot of the variable grouped by sport (on y-axis). To visualize how the distribution varies by sport. Also, a density plot by sport. Then, an ANOVA test was conducted to determine whether the variable differs significantly by sport. Below, a few packages are imported to allow for normative data visualizations from VALD to be inserted into ggplot2 visualizations. From there within each section, countermovement jump, hop jump, nordic and hip, all datasets are joined and the first graphic plots a variable on a density plot separated by sport. The second graphic does the same but groups the sports into "field" or “court” sports. The third imports an image of the normative data and plots a density plot with lines on the different percentiles with the normative distribution on the right. Below the graphics there is code that calculates the different quantiles of interest to us as well as t-tests to determine if there is significance in the difference of means. These chunks were reused for each variable and each sport so there is only one of each within each section. 

# Final Results Summary

For the threshold already created by strength coaches that we were asked to ensure validity, we determined that female athletes who are above the threshold for hamstring strength have about a 22% lower odds of a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold.  We then created our own statistically significant thresholds, stated above, for the following variables: Bilateral hip abduction adduction ratio, impusle, hip abduction mean imbalance, hip adduction mean imbalance, maximum nordic bilateral mean, nordic maximum imbalance, relative concentric power bilateral, eccentric concentric mean force ratio, maximum jump height, maximum concentric RPD, eccentric mean braking force maximum Vald RSI, mean RSI flight contact time, best contact time, peak vertical force, RPD at 200ms,  force at 200ms, DSI, jump height flight time, landing RPD, maximum concentric peak force, and concentric impulse. The standout variable is the Rate of force development (RPD) at 200ms. Female athletes who are above the threshold for RPD at 200ms have about a 72% lower odds of a lower body injury compared to those below the threshold.   
All four women's sports analyzed, basketball, volleyball, soccer, and lacrosse, had hamstring strength distributions that were slightly higher than the distributions of each sport's respective normative data. Basketball, soccer, and lacrosse also had good strength trends in relation to hip strength in comparison to their normative data, with the exception of soccer in relation to hip abduction strength; volleyball only had supine normative data. However, these specific women's sports performed slightly worse in regard to forced-decks metrics. Women's soccer was behind the normative data in countermovement jump RSI, and women’s lacrosse was behind the normative data in both hop jump RSI and hop jump contact time. All four sports had slightly lower numbers in terms of countermovement jump height. In general, comparing the sports with each other, there were trends seen between the court sports and the field sports, especially in Nordic strength and hip strength.

